## Pancreatic tumor microenvironment

In Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), the major components of the tumor microenvironment are a complex population of fibroblasts forming the bulk of the stroma, vasculature, inflammatory and immune cells @doi:10.1002/jcb.21209.
PDAC is associated with evolving alterations in the tumor microenvironment, including increasing fibrosis and extracellular matrix deposition (desmoplasia). Increasing desmoplasia accompanies progressive disease and creates intratumoral pressure that compresses the vasculature, resulting in limited blood flow to the tumor and consequent hypoxia and low nutrient delivery @doi:10.1158/2159-8290.CD-15-0671.

Interactions between the neoplastic and non-neoplastic cells and cellular matrix have been proposed to stimulate the extensive desmoplastic reaction. Stroma production is promoted by the activation of multiple cell signalling pathways [@doi:10.1002/ijc.22178; @doi:10.1002/mc.20827] these signalling cascades lead to secretion of structural matrix components including proteoglycans, collagen and fibronectin and the activation of catalytic enzymes such as proteinases.

PDAC tumours are enriched in collagen where cancer cells form gland-like structures, the main collagen proteins found in human PDAC are collagens I and IV @doi:10.1038/ncomms16031. Collectively, had been demostrated PDAC extracellular matrix also represents a nutrient reservoir for tumour cells when other fuels are limited @doi:10.1038/ncomms16031.

The interstitial matrix-associated collagens I/III, the basement membrane-associated collagen IV and the glycosaminoglycan hyaluronan have been found expressed at high levels in primary tumors and metastatic lesions in pancreatic cancer and are associated with poor survival[@doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1051]. Likewise, collagen type V is expressed by pancreatic stellate cells in the stroma of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and promotes the malignant phenotype in pancreatic cancer cell lines @doi:10.1016/j.canlet.2014.10.020. In contrast, collagen XV a secreted non-fibrillar collagen reduces invasion of pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells therefore hab been proposed as a tumor suppressor in the basement membrane zone [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0072250; @doi:10.1089/104454903321908601].

The laminins are a family of extracellular matrix glycoproteins localized in the basement membrane that separates epithellal cells from the underlying stroma. They are involved in several biological processes including cell-matrix, cell growth, migration, tumour growth and metastases @doi:10/bxqv94.

Laminin-332 is a major member of the laminin family, consisting of α3, β3, and γ2 chains, encoded by the LAMA3, LAMB3, and LAMC2 genes, respectively. Laminin subunit beta-3 (LAMB3) is upregulated in PDAC and suppressing its expression reduces cell proliferation, invasion, and migration by downregulating epithelial‒mesenchymal transition (EMT)-related proteins (N-cadherin, vimentin, Snail, Slug) by regulation of PI3K/Akt signaling pathway @doi:10.1038/s41419-019-1320-z; @doi:10.3892/ol.2018.8678. Besides, the expression of laminin subunits LAMA3 and LAMC2 are upregulated with a favorable ability of distinguishing between PDAC and non-tumor tissues @doi:10.18632/aging.102007; @doi:10.3892/ol.2018.8678; @doi:10.1074/mcp.M112.023507. 

Fibronectin is an extracellular matrix ECM glycoprotein that supports cell-ECM interactions and is crucial for wound healing response, development, and maintaining tissue homeostasis @doi:10.1016/j.canlet.2015.12.027. Moreover,fibronectin is an extracellular protein that is upregulated in pancreatic cancer and confers chemoresistance and metastasis [@doi:10.1186/s12885-019-5803-1; @doi:10.1186/s12957-019-1574-z]. 
Fibronectin induces distinct signals that promote survival and migration of PDAC cells @doi:10.1016/j.canlet.2015.12.027. Cell surface integrins are the most well characterized receptors for fibronectin. Fibronectin binds to integrin receptors (α5β1), thereby activating the FAK pathway [@doi:10.1126/science.285.5430.1028; @doi:10/fbjvhn]. These signals regulates cellular responses such as survival, proliferation, differentiation, adhesion and migration @doi:10.1242/jcs.018093; @doi:10.1242/jcs.01014. 

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of zinc-dependent endopeptidases, they are involved in degradation of the extracellular matrix . MMPs support tissue remodeling and stimulate neovascularization and inflammatory response, both in physiological and in pathological conditions, for example, in tumors @doi:10.1006/cbir.2000.0647.

MMP-2, MMP-7, and MMP-9 expressions correlate with various morphological features of the PDAC tumor such as inflammation, necrosis, and formation of the new blood vessels @doi:10.1155/2016/9895721 and their tissue inhibitors (TIMPs) TIMPs 1–3 compared with normal pancreas @doi:10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-1157-03.

Pancreatic stellate cells (PSC) are responsible for desmoplasic generation @doi:10.1111/cas.13847. The activation of PSC from a quiescent to an activated state is an intercellular stimuli from tumor‐stromal interactions. PCS can be transform into myofibroblast‐like cells, which express α‐smooth muscle actin (α‐SMA) as cancer‐associated fibroblasts (CAF) [@doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2012.11.037; @doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2010.05.084]. 

CAF are important components of tumor stroma and affect cancer growth, survival, metastasis, angiogenesis and resistance to chemotherapy or radiotherapy through various cytokines @doi:10.2217/fon.15.176, and contribute to a diminished immune function @doi:10.3389/fimmu.2019.00847.
Indirect co-culture of CAFs and pancreatic cancer cells by conditioned media alters the metabolic mechanism enhancing cell migration *in vitro* @doi:10.3892/or.2017.5479. 
	

